# cello-duet

This is an experimental piece for two cellos with certain movements based on probability and Markov chains.
* Column stochastic matrices are generated by `matrix.py` file.
* All of the probabilites used in the piece are outlined in the `master.xls` file.
* A `.pdf` file of the piece is here for viewing pleasure.
* Source notation `.mscz` is also here for viewing pleasure.

I intend on creating a Jupyter notebook to consolidate all of the experiments in the future.

## Dependencies

Jupyter, music21, numpy

## Movement II. Pitch

The B-flat pentatonic pitch collection was chosen (Bb, C, D, F, G). 
The respective probabilities are given in `master.xls`, worksheet `pitches`. 
Executing `pitch.py` outputs 75 choices with the given probabilities. 
Rhythm was determined creatively. 
The results are displayed in `results.xlsx`. 

## Movement III. Rhythm

Twenty-four (24) different rhythms were created and outlined in `rhythms.svg`. 
The respective probabilities are given in `master.xls` file, worksheet `rhythms`. 
Executing `rhythm.py` outputs 75 choices with the given probabilities. 
Pitch was determined creatively using the A pentatonic collection (A, B, C#, E, F#).  
The results are displayed in `results.xlsx`.

## Movement VI. Pitch-rhythm

The D pentatonic pitch collection was chosen (D, E, F#, A, B). 
The respective probabilities are given in `master.xls`, worksheet `pr-p`.  
The twenty-four rhythms are again utilized and the respective probabilites are given in `master.xls`, worksheet `pr-r`. 
Executing `pr-pr.py` outputs 75 pitch and rhythm choices with the given probabilities. 
The results are displayed in `results.xlsx`. 

To avoid repitition due to the extra notes created by certain rhythms, a Markov process with transition matrix in `master.xls`, worksheet `pr-tr` was used to generate notes based on the given one. 
This is implemented in `pr-tr.py`, which asks for the starting note (F = F#) and the total number of pitches in the rhythm (2, 3, or 4).

## Movement VII. Markov

The E-flat pentatonic pitch collections was used (Eb, F, G, Bb, C) as the basis for the movement.
First, a Markov process in `m-tr1.py` was used to determine transposition or inversion 15 times with a randomly generated transition matrix in `master.xls`, worksheet `m-tr1`.
All eight subsets with 3 elements or more of the pentatonic set class were then prescribed an absorbing Markov process (used to illustrate how first-order Markov proccesses eventually attain a steady-state; in the future, absorbing Markov chains can be implemented in a more audible way using a different musical element).
The transition matrix for that is in `master.xls`, worksheet `m-tr2`, and is run through `m-tr2.py` 15 times.
The rhythms were limited to a subset of the ones in `rhythm.svg`, and the transition matrix in `master.xls`, worksheet `m-tr4` carefully conditioned to avoid certain awkward/challenging rhythmic ideas that resulted from the previous movements (in future compositions, more limitations may be prudent). 
Rhythm was generated by `m-tr4.py`75 times, and every 5 rhythms was assigned 1 transposition and 1 pitch class.
Finally, specific notes were determined by `m-tr3.py` similarly to the previous movement with transition matrices in `master.xls`, worksheets `m-tr3`. The program outputs numbers from 1 to n. The elements of a pitch class are ordered in normal form, 1 being the lowest note, and n being the highest note.
